Aligning IT activities to the business.
Why align IT to the business?
Remember, according to the Info-Tech research study,
47% of business leaders feel that business goals are unsupported by IT.
What this means is that the business may change the leaders of IT or maybe even
outsource IT if we look at it from an IT-centric viewpoint.
From a business standpoint, the business suffers of course.
Understanding alignment.
So,
alignment means that IT effectively can achieve business objectives
resultant in improved business outcomes that produce business value
aligning IT team goals to business goals.
Now,
in that section we went through a complete example from a business goal to
a IT project task or activity in a very visible format,
easy for the business to see, read and understand and of course,
easy for your team as well.
Defining priorities.
We discussed sources of priorities that is where they can
come from and the quality of their priority from vague to
very detailed and lastly, setting priorities,
that's based on your interpretation of the priority.
You could use a project card and a priority grid to easily and
quickly and visually layout priorities and color code statuses to
make it easy for the business to see, read and understand.
Now, if you could have at least one takeaway from this module,
everything we did is for the business.
In your new role as an IT manger,
that is it's helping the business be successful and if you do this it will
only follow that your career will be successful as well.
Now, let's see how we could better communicate and keep our customers happy.
Managing customer expectations.
Why manage customer expectations?
We learned that the secret of customer satisfaction lies not just in what you
necessarily do but at what the customer expects you to do.
We defined customer expectations, we discussed the relative worth,
merit and importance of understanding customer expectations and why
these can make you and your team optimize your capabilities,. We
discussed several strategies for managing customer expectations such
as quality of communications, verbal and written,
knowing your limitations,
that is know what you and your team are truly capable of and
ensuring your customer understands that,
setting clear timelines,
remaining practical yet still show optimism and
learning how to say no by saying yes, but or choose among options.
Service level agreements, expectations are specific,
not fuzzy, so expectations are in writing,
expectations can be measured and we did constructed service level
agreement by business attribute and we gave some examples.
Valuing customer service or measuring customer service by using my simple
customer service quadrant approach to isolate each of your services or
products and allow the customer to rank them.
This gives you valuable information to better focus your team's
efforts and reset the customer's expectations.
Lastly, please embrace,
live and breath the fact that every single customer interaction is
an opportunity to manage customer expectations.
Building team structure.
We learned that some structure, no matter how large your team is important.
We explored a few ways to structure your team such as by customer,
application, product, service or function or a hybrid.
This enables parts of your team to be more customer or outward facing
and everyone to know exactly clearly who is responsible for what and
provides a platform for scalability as well.
We learned that a role is a description of what you
generally do each day at your work.
Some examples may be manager, database administrator, software engineer.
Also you must document in writing each role that's
required for you to fulfill your job,
ensure each person knows their role or roles and keep it up to date.
A responsibility is a duty or collection of duties
in the course of doing one's job, such as designing relational databases,
providing technical leadership or perform business analysis.
A collection of responsibilities makes up a role.
Building team skills.
We learned that not only are technical skills important you know,
the alphabet soup skills if you will,
but also communication and leadership skills.
These two other skill areas are in my opinion just as important.
Determining skill requirements.
We discussed my six-step process on how to determine the skills your
team needs and to create a basic training plan.
I recommend you revisit your plan about each quarter or as needed.
Informal training ideas.
We learned about luncheon learns and how you could provide training
in an informal setting and build team comradery.
Also, presentation skills can be improved for the person presenting.
We also touched on dinner and develop to help your team get
started in possibly a newer technology.
Also we discussed vendor events where vendors are talking about their products
or services but made to provide a quick and zero-cost way to learn about a
topic and lastly in this section we discussed how to grow your team member
skills and capabilities through on-the-job,
OJT, opportunities by giving them assignments and providing a mentor,
team leader or yourself to guide them and give them the
support and encouragement that they need.
Performance reviews.
We discussed how performance reviews contribute to building team
capabilities by determining the areas of improvement which may
drive additions to your training plan.
Motivating your team.
Yes, there are many ways to motivate your team from awards,
thanks yous,
bonuses etc., but a more subtle and systematic way is to
align your team's work to the business,
connecting your team with the customer and providing consistent performance
reviews and actions such as training from those reviews.
These management practices are not one-offs like an award but instead an
integral part of how you manage your team consistently every day.
The results are a team that is nurtured, content, motivated and productive.
Okay, acquiring the right talent.
Retention.
Before you start hiring or replacing people,
take a look inward and determine your retention rate,
that is how many people stay working for you over a period of time
compared to the total people working for you.
A simple example is that if you have five people for
a 12-month period and one leaves,
your retention is four divided by five which is 80%
and that sounds kind of bad really, so I would pro rate it using months.
Also,
you want to look at things that improve retention such
as recognizing and rewarding people,
offering learning and growth opportunities and lastly,
don't forget, they don't leave the company,
they leave you.
Finding the right talent.
We talked about hiring not only from the outside of your company but inside.
I suggest always looking inside first,
so you'll want to also look how the new hire may add value for
longer range portfolio transitions or new skills you didn't
originally realize may be of value or new capabilities such as a
very poised speaker or succession planning,
someone who could potentially replace you and lastly,
diversity,
some of the viewpoints that may bring a whole new emphasis to your team.
Defining the job requirements.
First understand exactly why you are hiring.
This will of course help you define the new job requirements.
Sure,
you will need to acquire new technical skills or possibly improve
some that you already have but you will also need to look for
leadership and communication skills.
People need to write effectively,
speak effectively and interact effectively to work
with your customers and management.
The acquisition process.
We discussed my six-step acquisition process.
Step one, document and post your new hire skill requirements.
Step two, screen, and phone,
so you are narrowing your large pile of resumes to
those that pass your phone interview.
Next, step three is the in-person interview and test potentially.
You may also want one or more of your team members
involved in that interview process.
Step four, follow on interviews.
Using one interview is not enough.
After you have interviewed your first round of candidates,
I suggest you narrow down to just two or three and have a
second interview with each of those.
Step five, selection.
Now,
you pick the one you want but have a back up in case
that person declines your offer.
That can happen.
Step six, the normal HR or company paperwork.
Well, preparing your questions, what are you going to ask them?
It is important to prepare your questions so you can pull out
the information you need from that person.
You may also want a test or maybe a program to write
to test their skills objectively.
The other questions again are critical to getting them talking.
Onboarding.
Lastly we discussed your checklist of activities for the new person.
First, introductions, then business alignment,
your customers, structure, roles, responsibilities,
and the processes that your team follows.
Then they get their first assignment or two and are assigned a mentor which
may be yourself but I prefer a mentor to be a coworker.
This builds the mentoring skill of the mentor and helps
build a relationship between them.
Alright,
now let's look at the summary of the next module on communication
skills and how important they are for you as a manager.
Managing through effective communication.
We talked about informal communication techniques such as stand ups,
walk arounds, emails, and daily interactions.
These are all very,
very important but informal forms of communication
that should happen every single day.
Then there's the more formal types of communication.
You're going to be making presentations,
you're going to be holding meetings,
you're going to be sending more formal email statuses
potentially or just regular emails to customers or maybe
senior management and of course,
status reporting needs to be pretty structured and pretty formal to look very,
very professional and of course being an effective
communicator means being a really, really good listener,
so listen to everyone, customers, management and your team well.
Lastly, read my lips, it's all about the people.
People is what makes it all happen.
Okay,
now let's look at the key processes that you'll need to put in
place to run a smooth and productive team.
Promoting productivity through team processes.
In this module I gave you a starter list or a starter kit of 10 key processes.
Now,
what's important in the summary here though is really
what are your key processes going to be?
I suggest you can start with my 10 or a subset of my 10 and then you
could evolve those or change those as you see necessary,
so first determine your key processes, start with mine first if you like,
come up with new ones if you like but make sure they're documented.
Now, use these in this module as a start of course.
I think that's really, really good and helpful.
I've laid everything out for you and you can add,
remove or improve them as you see fit.
Always document the processes not matter what.
That way you can educate and train your team.
If your customer's curious about your processes,
then you can show them say a document or a PowerPoint that would explain
each of your processes as well and continuously improve.
No process is set in stone is going to last forever so
you'll want to revisit your processes.
Again, I suggest once a quarter or as needed.
If an issue comes up, go ahead and tackle that process,
find an improvement for it, update the documentation, educate and train.